README.md, before:

# DataEng_FB-W

Repository for **Data Engineering 2025** course.  
Project investigates how **weather conditions influence football match outcomes**.

---

## Data Sources
The project uses the following data sources:

| Source | Description | Link |
|--------|-------------|------|
| **Kaggle Football Dataset** | Match results, team info, scores, etc. | [Kaggle Dataset](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/excel4soccer/espn-soccer-data/data) |
| **Open-Meteo API** | Weather data including temperature, precipitation, wind speed, snowfall, etc. | [Open-Meteo API](https://open-meteo.com/) |


---

## Data Layers

### 1. Raw Data (Bronze)
- Stores **original unprocessed data** in the following tables:
  - `bronze_weather`
  - `bronze_fixtures`
  - `bronze_teams`
  - `bronze_venues`
  - `bronze_teamStats`
- Purpose: keep data as-is for reproducibility and traceability.

### 2. Staging Layer (Silver)
- Located in `dbt/models/staging/`
- Purpose: **clean and standardize raw data** before building marts.
- **Key tasks:**
  - Type casting (e.g., convert strings to `Int32` or `DateTime`)
  - Handling null values
  - Creating **surrogate keys** using `halfMD5`
- **Key objects:**  
  - `stg_dim_*` → staging dimension views  
  - `stg_fact_*` → staging fact views  

### 3. Mart Layer (Gold)
- Located in `dbt/models/marts/`
- Purpose: **business-level curated tables** ready for analysis
- **Key objects:**  
  - Fact tables: `fact_match`  
  - Dimension tables: `dim_team`, `dim_date`, `dim_weather`, `dim_venue`  
- Notes: Aggregates and joins staging views into analytical tables suitable for querying.

---

## Running the project

### Project Setup and Configuration

1. #### Kaggle credentials: For initial data ingestion, write your credentials into the .env file:
   
`KAGGLE_USERNAME={username}
KAGGLE_KEY={token}`

2. #### Start services: Build and run all necessary containers (Airflow, dbt, Clickhouse)
```
docker compose up -d --build
```
3. #### Airflow: 
Access at [http://localhost:8080](http://localhost:8080). Start the `update_kaggle_espn_soccer` DAG to begin the ingestion and transformation process.

4. #### Clickhouse Client:
To open interactive SQL session directly in the database, use:
```
docker compose exec clickhouse-server clickhouse-client
```
### Manual dbt Workflow

While Airflow handles orchestration, it is possible to use dbt manually as well.

| Step | Command (Run from Host) | Purpose |
|------|--------------------------|----------|
| **1. Load Dependencies** | `docker exec -it dbt dbt deps` | Must be run first to download external dbt packages defined in `packages.yml`. |
| **2. Run Models** | `docker exec -it dbt dbt run` | Builds all staging and mart models. |
| **3. Run Tests** | `docker exec -it dbt dbt test` | Executes data quality tests. 

---

## Screenshots of Airflow and dbt DAGS

---

## Results of the Example Analytical Queries from Project 1

1. Is the variability of match outcomes higher in extreme weather conditions (e.g, very hot vs. very cold, strong wind, heavy rain)?


2. Are certain teams more resilient to difficult weather conditions?
3. How much does attendance depend on the weather conditions?
4. Are home teams more/less affected by extreme weather?
5. Does the number of fouls committed depend on weather conditions?
6. Does bad weather impact penalty shootouts?

Commit message:

Revise analytical queries formatting in README
Updated the format and numbering of analytical queries in the README.

README.md, after:

# DataEng_FB-W

Repository for **Data Engineering 2025** course.  
Project investigates how **weather conditions influence football match outcomes**.

---

## Data Sources
The project uses the following data sources:

| Source | Description | Link |
|--------|-------------|------|
| **Kaggle Football Dataset** | Match results, team info, scores, etc. | [Kaggle Dataset](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/excel4soccer/espn-soccer-data/data) |
| **Open-Meteo API** | Weather data including temperature, precipitation, wind speed, snowfall, etc. | [Open-Meteo API](https://open-meteo.com/) |


---

## Data Layers

### 1. Raw Data (Bronze)
- Stores **original unprocessed data** in the following tables:
  - `bronze_weather`
  - `bronze_fixtures`
  - `bronze_teams`
  - `bronze_venues`
  - `bronze_teamStats`
- Purpose: keep data as-is for reproducibility and traceability.

### 2. Staging Layer (Silver)
- Located in `dbt/models/staging/`
- Purpose: **clean and standardize raw data** before building marts.
- **Key tasks:**
  - Type casting (e.g., convert strings to `Int32` or `DateTime`)
  - Handling null values
  - Creating **surrogate keys** using `halfMD5`
- **Key objects:**  
  - `stg_dim_*` → staging dimension views  
  - `stg_fact_*` → staging fact views  

### 3. Mart Layer (Gold)
- Located in `dbt/models/marts/`
- Purpose: **business-level curated tables** ready for analysis
- **Key objects:**  
  - Fact tables: `fact_match`  
  - Dimension tables: `dim_team`, `dim_date`, `dim_weather`, `dim_venue`  
- Notes: Aggregates and joins staging views into analytical tables suitable for querying.

---

## Running the project

### Project Setup and Configuration

1. #### Kaggle credentials: For initial data ingestion, write your credentials into the .env file:
   
`KAGGLE_USERNAME={username}
KAGGLE_KEY={token}`

2. #### Start services: Build and run all necessary containers (Airflow, dbt, Clickhouse)
```
docker compose up -d --build
```
3. #### Airflow: 
Access at [http://localhost:8080](http://localhost:8080). Start the `update_kaggle_espn_soccer` DAG to begin the ingestion and transformation process.

4. #### Clickhouse Client:
To open interactive SQL session directly in the database, use:
```
docker compose exec clickhouse-server clickhouse-client
```
### Manual dbt Workflow

While Airflow handles orchestration, it is possible to use dbt manually as well.

| Step | Command (Run from Host) | Purpose |
|------|--------------------------|----------|
| **1. Load Dependencies** | `docker exec -it dbt dbt deps` | Must be run first to download external dbt packages defined in `packages.yml`. |
| **2. Run Models** | `docker exec -it dbt dbt run` | Builds all staging and mart models. |
| **3. Run Tests** | `docker exec -it dbt dbt test` | Executes data quality tests. 

---

## Screenshots of Airflow and dbt DAGS

---

## Results of the Example Analytical Queries from Project 1
Queries can be found from the Updated SQL Queries folder.

1. #### Is the variability of match outcomes higher in extreme weather conditions (e.g, very hot vs. very cold, strong wind, heavy rain)?
match_outcome_variability_rain.sql, match_outcome_variability_wind.sql, match_outcome_variability_temp.sql

2. #### Are certain teams more resilient to difficult weather conditions?
team.resilience.sql

3. #### How much does attendance depend on the weather conditions?
attendance_rain.sql
  
4. #### Are home teams more/less affected by extreme weather?
home_win_rain.sql 
   
6. #### Does the number of fouls committed depend on weather conditions?
fouls_commited.sql



8. #### Does bad weather impact penalty shootouts?
penalty.sql
